Preface
I
When Mohandas K. Gandhi landed in Bombay in January 1915, he was already forty-five, and had been away a long time from his homeland. Gandhi grew up in two small chiefdoms in Gujarat, insulated from the social and political changes taking place in British India. He studied law in London, and then, after failing to establish himself at the Bar in Bombay and Rajkot, moved to South Africa, where he developed a flourishing legal practice before turning to activism and social work. 
The two decades that Gandhi spent in the diaspora were crucial to his intellectual and moral development. Living outside India, he came to appreciate the enormous linguistic and religious diversity of his homeland. It was in South Africa that he forged a regimen of extreme personal austerity, experimenting with different foods and methods of healing. It was here that he first thought of, and applied, the technique of non-violent resistance known as satyagraha. 
Gandhi’s years in South Africa were important to him, personally, yet his years in India were of far greater historic import. In South Africa, he sought to represent the Indian diaspora, roughly 1,50,000
people in all. In his homeland, he strove to become the leader of its 300 million people. In South Africa, he worked only in towns and districts where Indians were present; in India, he made his ideas known in every corner of the subcontinent. In one place, he led a relatively small community of migrants; in the other, he became the central figure in the largest colony of the world’s greatest Empire. 
The India that Gandhi returned to in 1915 was by no means politically quiescent. The Indian National Congress, set up in 1885, had a ‘Moderate’ faction, which politely and respectfully petitioned the British to grant Indians greater rights; and an ‘Extremist’ faction, which resorted to street protest and the burning of British cloth to demand political and economic independence for India. Whereas the Congress professed to represent all Indians regardless of caste or creed, the Muslim League was established in 1906 specifically to protect the interests of the subcontinent’s largest religious minority. There were also some revolutionary groups, small but very active, who sought through bombings and assassinations to scare the British out of India. 
These political groups and tendencies were resolutely urban as well as middle class. They had no roots in the villages. After his return to India in 1915, Gandhi took this city-based and elite-dominated opposition to British rule and made it into a mass movement, reaching deep into the countryside, bringing in millions of peasants, workers, artisans and women. The techniques Gandhi used, the travels he undertook, and the friendships he forged to accomplish this transformation, form a major part of the narrative. This biography of India’s most famous patriot is inevitably also a history
of the most important political party of the time, the Indian National Congress, and of the freedom movement itself. 
To deliver India from British rule was by no means Gandhi’s only preoccupation. The forging of harmonious relations between India’s often disputatious religious communities was a second. The desire to end the pernicious practice of untouchability in his own Hindu faith was a third. And the impulse to develop economic self-reliance for India and moral self-reliance for Indians was a fourth. 
These campaigns were conducted by Gandhi in parallel. All were to him of equal importance. In 1933, he wrote to a close friend that ‘my life is one indivisible whole. . . . I can’t devote myself entirely to untouchability and say: “Neglect Hindu–Muslim unity or swaraj”. All these things run into one another and are inter-dependent. You will find at one time in my life an emphasis on one thing, at another time on another. But that is just like a pianist, now emphasizing one note and now another. But they are all related to [one] another.’1
For Gandhi, political independence meant nothing at all unless it was accompanied by religious harmony, caste and gender equality, and the development of self-respect in every Indian. Other patriots had used the Hindi word swaraj to signify national independence; Gandhi made Indians aware of its true or original meaning, swa-raj, or self-rule. 
II
Gandhi’s life in India was, among other things, a series of often intense and long-running arguments. 
In each of his four callings, Gandhi adopted innovative methods, which to some appeared daringly revolutionary, to others timid and reformist. A friend from his London days, who had followed his subsequent career closely, remarked in 1934 that Gandhi ‘is a problem. To Rulers and Governors he is a thorn in their side. To logicians he is a fool. To economists he is a hopeless ignoramus. To materialists he is a dreamer. To communists he is a drag on the wheel. To constitutionalists he represents rank revolution.’2 To this list we might add: ‘To Muslim leaders he was a communal Hindu. To Hindu extremists he was a notorious appeaser of Muslims. To the “untouchables” he appeared a defender of high-caste orthodoxy. To the Brahmin he was a reformer in too much of a hurry.’
This book tracks Gandhi’s arguments in the fields of politics, social reform, religious relations and self-improvement. These arguments were sometimes private, conducted through letters written and received; but more often public, conducted in widely circulated newspapers and books and pamphlets. Gandhi’s critics were often considerable figures, who possessed a commitment that sometimes equalled his own, and an intelligence that sometimes surpassed his. I have sought to reconstruct these arguments as they unfolded at the time, regardless of how they have subsequently been interpreted, projected, or (as is sadly often the case) distorted. 
Gandhi actively engaged with every important aspect of social and public life in India: the impact of colonialism, the caste system, religious conflict, the emancipation of women, the role of the State in social life, the role of technology in economic reconstruction, the role of language in social and national renewal. These engagements were important to Gandhi, and for the history of his country. 
Through what he said and did, and whom he battled with or argued against, Gandhi helped enable India’s transition from empire to nation, from autocracy to democracy, from a society whose laws sanctioned the most extreme forms of discrimination to a country whose Constitution mandated equality of all citizens regardless of caste, gender, language or religion. 
While living and working in India, Gandhi was inevitably drawn into profoundly important political developments that originated outside his homeland, such as the two World Wars, and the rise of Bolshevism and Nazism. Between his return to India in 1915 and his death in 1948, Gandhi made but one single trip outside South Asia. However, his work was keenly followed in many continents. 
British politicians and statesmen wrote of him, and he had an extraordinary impact on ordinary British people too. Gandhi never visited the United States, yet his ideas and movements were discussed in American newspapers, magazines, books and radio shows. They even made their way into popular advertisements. 
Gandhi’s public role looms large, but this is not a book about Gandhi the public man alone. I examine here his own continuing examinations into himself, pre-eminently on the question of celibacy. 
I study his complex and often tortured relations with his wife and his four children. And I pay tribute to the men and women who, by joining in the struggle for freedom, helped make Gandhi the best-known person in India, perhaps the best-known person in the world. More details of these
‘secondary’ characters in Gandhi’s life and struggles will emerge in the pages that follow. But of the fact that they were absolutely central to his career and fame, there should be no doubt. Of the most remarkable of these characters, whose role previous biographers have (perhaps unwittingly) tended to underplay, Gandhi himself wrote that this man’s ‘greatest characteristic’ was ‘his ability to reduce himself to zero, whenever occasion demanded it’. 3
III
This book is a free-standing sequel to Gandhi Before India, my account of Mohandas K. Gandhi’s years as a schoolboy in Rajkot and a law student in London, and, above all, of his decades as a lawyer-activist in Natal and the Transvaal. That book ended with Gandhi’s departure from South Africa in 1914; this book takes the story up to Gandhi’s death in 1948. A reading of its prequel is not mandatory to a fuller understanding of Gandhi: The Years That Changed the World, whose events are played out against a very different historical and geographical landscape. However, I have, wherever necessary, referred the interested reader to the relevant pages in Gandhi Before India, particularly with regard to individuals who feature fleetingly in this book but more substantially in the other. 
The playwright Michael Frayn once remarked that ‘ideas adopt you, like a lost dog on a walk’. 
Historians are adopted by characters, rather than ideas. I have myself been stalked by the shadow (and the substance) of Mohandas K. Gandhi all my working life. I spent the first fifteen years of my career working on the history of Indian environmentalism, whose main actors were influenced by Gandhian methods of analysis, critique, struggle and reconstruction. I spent the next ten years studying the history of India since Independence, where the main actors were often inspired, sometimes challenged, and occasionally disgusted by Gandhi. 
That Gandhi should loom large in these areas of research was perhaps not entirely a surprise. But he followed me even in the most unexpected places. When I wrote a social history of cricket, I found the name of Gandhi popping up everywhere. This was odd, because Gandhi had a profound distaste for popular passions such as cinema and sport. He is known to have watched only one film in his life. 
He occasionally attended a football match in South Africa, but then only because the players were his fellow resisters against racial discrimination. He knew nothing of cricket, football, hockey or any other sport. But while Gandhi did not watch, play or talk about cricket, he influenced how cricket was watched, played and talked about in the decades between the wars. In fighting their own battles on and off the field, cricket-mad Indians invoked the name of the cricket-ignorant Gandhi all the time. 
And so a book on a sport in which Gandhi had absolutely no interest ended with forty index entries against his name. 
Since I had been shadowed by Gandhi for so long, it was time I properly and formally settled my accounts with him. A second reason for writing a new biography of Gandhi was that existing biographies were written by scholars much older than myself.4 Every generation of Indians needed, I thought, its own assessment or reassessment of Gandhi; just as every generation of Britons would revisit Churchill afresh; every generation of the French, De Gaulle; every generation of Americans, Franklin Roosevelt, and so on. 
But there was a third reason, and this the most compelling. All previous biographies had relied largely on the ninety-seven volumes of Gandhi’s Collected Works. As a biographer, I knew that one must go beyond the works or writings of one’s subject. As a historian, in the course of my wanderings through the archives, I had come across hundreds of fascinating references to Gandhi in sources other than the Collected Works. 
The years up to Gandhi’s departure from South Africa cover a mere twelve volumes of the Collected Works. The Indian period, by contrast, extends over more than eighty volumes. Gandhi’s own writings—whether letters, articles, editorials, speeches or interviews—were more substantial, and far better documented, in the years he spent in India. Since the campaigns he undertook in his homeland were more important than those in South Africa, they provoked greater reflection, analysis and reanalysis. 
A close, chronological reading of the Collected Works was therefore mandatory. The exercise was immensely interesting. Gandhi, who had adopted the British taste for self-deprecation, once said that
‘I have no university education worth the name. My high school career was never above the average. 
I was thankful if I could pass my examinations. Distinction in the school was beyond my aspiration.’5
This was true so far as it went. Yet no twentieth-century politician or reformer so intensely immersed himself in the thoughts and actions of ordinary people. He may not have gone to Oxford or Cambridge, nor even to Calcutta or Bombay University, but Gandhi had a near-continuous education in the University of Life. 
Reading the Collected Works was instructive in terms of both content and style. Gandhi was a wonderfully clear writer, who (as one contemporary remarked) had developed a prose style ‘all his own, composed of short sentences shot-out like shrapnel in a feu de joie at a new-year parade, dynamic in force and devastating in effect’. 6 The Trinidadian writer Seepersad Naipaul told his son
(the future Nobel laureate V.S. Naipaul) that good literature boiled down to ‘writing from the belly rather than from the cheek’. While most people wrote from the cheek, added Naipaul père, ‘Gandhi’s writing is great’ because he wrote from the belly.7
I studied Gandhi’s own writings, but I had to go beyond them, to juxtapose what Gandhi himself said with what others wrote to him or said about him, whether in public or in private. This involved research on the vast collection of letters to Gandhi housed in the Sabarmati Ashram in Ahmedabad; in the private papers of his friends, contemporaries, colleagues and rivals; in the institutional collections of organizations that impinged on his work; in the archival records of the British Raj, these located in London and New Delhi, as well as in provincial archives in Bombay, Lucknow and Nagpur; and in runs of contemporary newspapers, in English and in Hindi. I also consulted printed secondary sources such as memoirs and biographies, but used them sparingly, since retrospective accounts are often less credible, and always less vivid, than those written at the time the events they describe actually occurred. 
In reconstructing Gandhi’s life and struggles, this book draws upon more than sixty different archival collections, located in repositories around the world. These include a colossal hoard of papers belonging to Mohandas K. Gandhi himself, which have only recently been placed in the public domain, and whose significance is explained below. 
In or about the year 1920, a young man from the Punjab named Pyarelal Nayar joined Gandhi. He served him devotedly for the next three decades, first as the assistant to Gandhi’s secretary Mahadev Desai, and then, after Mahadev’s death in 1942, as his main and often only secretary. In the 1930s, Pyarelal’s younger sister, Sushila Nayar, a medical doctor, also joined Gandhi’s entourage. 
Shortly after Gandhi’s death in New Delhi in January 1948, Pyarelal visited Sevagram, the rural settlement Gandhi had founded in central India. He collected the papers kept there, and took them back to Delhi. Over the next thirty years, Pyarelal sought to write a multivolume life of Gandhi. By the time he died, in 1982, several volumes had appeared, albeit not in a chronological order. The task now devolved on his sister, Sushila Nayar. Dr Nayar sought to complete the project, unsuccessfully. 
She herself died in 2000. 
Despite their closeness to Gandhi, neither Pyarelal nor Dr Nayar were scholars (or indeed writers). The volumes they published have some interesting details, but the narrative is often disconnected and rambling. When, during the 1960s and 1970s, the project to compile Gandhi’s Collected Works was under way, its legendary chief editor, Professor K. Swaminathan, sought unavailingly to have Pyarelal allow full access to the collection under his control. This he would not do, instead offering the editors of the Collected Works letters by Gandhi himself in dribs and drabs, while withholding other relevant material which would have placed these letters in context. (‘When it came to his material on Gandhi’, remarked K. Swaminathan once, Pyarelal was ‘like Othello guarding Desdemona’. 8)
Why Pyarelal was so possessive about these papers must remain a matter of speculation. Perhaps he had resolved, as someone who had been with Gandhi for the better part of three decades, to be to him what Boswell had been to Dr Johnson. Perhaps he was jealous of D.G. Tendulkar, the independent-minded Bombay scholar who—before the Collected Works had got off the ground—
produced an eight-volume chronological account of Gandhi’s life, based on newspaper reports, Gandhi’s own printed statements and writings, and books. Pyarelal may have felt even more determined to publish a more authoritative account, which meant keeping other Gandhi scholars away from the materials he had. 
After Pyarelal died in 1982, a far-sighted archivist, Dr Hari Dev Sharma, persuaded Sushila Nayar to transfer the papers to the Nehru Memorial Museum and Library (NMML), of which he was then deputy director. Until Dr Nayar’s own death, she had the right to withhold permission to use them, which she usually did, since she still hoped—despite her own infirmity and advanced age—to complete her brother’s task. Although the NMML knew that these were in effect the personal papers of the greatest modern Indian, given the closeness of the brother-and-sister duo to Gandhi himself, they did not broach the matter of making them available to the larger scholarly community while they were alive. But then Dr Nayar herself died. Neither she nor her brother had any children. So, the NMML made the wise and undeniably public-spirited decision to have these papers made open to researchers. 
However, this could not be done overnight. For, Pyarelal was not a trained historian, still less a trained archivist. The papers he had collected from Sevagram were kept in hundreds of boxes, these very loosely categorized according to subject, year or correspondent. The size of the collection and the haphazard state it was in meant that its sorting, classification, preservation and indexing took several years. One massive chunk of the collection was made available for consultation in 2007; a second and almost as substantial a chunk, five years later. 
Containing thousands of files, many of which are several hundred pages in extent, this recently opened collection covers all the major themes in Gandhi’s wide-ranging and often controversial career from the 1920s till his death. The files include numerous petitions and pamphlets sent to Gandhi, a great deal of correspondence concerning Gandhi, thousands of fascinating and often important letters to Gandhi, and even some key letters written by Gandhi which were accidentally or deliberately kept out of the Collected Works. The newly opened Gandhi Papers at the NMML have been an absolutely indispensable source for this book (as the references to them scattered through the endnotes reveal), and I feel deeply privileged to be the first Gandhi biographer to have used them. 
Apart from Pyarelal, of course. Possessiveness is not an unusual trait among historians, and it is very nearly ubiquitous among biographers. For all his quirkiness when alive, I think one must be extremely grateful to Pyarelal for having preserved the papers of his master for so long. We Indians have an appalling record when it comes to preserving or maintaining historical records. Family papers are sold as raddi, government papers are incinerated. And what man cannot destroy, nature—
in the form of dust, fungus and the monsoon—takes care of. Scholars much younger than myself, and of many nationalities, shall have reason to be grateful for Pyarelal’s possessive devotion and devoted possessiveness. 
